---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Is there a better operating System?
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2019-04-21
labels:
  - Operating System
  - Learning
---


When it comes to operating systems in today’s computers, Microsoft Windows owns a monopoly. Windows is the operating system for almost 79% of the world’s computers to date 
(statcounter.com).  “Microsoft claimed that there are 400 million active users of Windows 10” just in 2017 and the number is growing (theverge.com).  Even looking at the data as 
a whole Windows still is a widely used operating system only being beat out by android. The answer to why Windows is so popular is easy to see, it comes prepackaged with many 
computers. But there are so many other choices of operating systems but even the more well-known OS’s like iOS and Linux are barely used by the wider public. I personally myself 
before an Operating Systems class had never used another operating system on desktop besides Windows. While during class we talk about the functions and components of an 
operating system we never discuss what constitutes a well-made operating system. One question then comes to mind, is Windows 10 a good operating system? Is it right that Windows 
continues to dominate just because it comes preinstalled on so many machines? And if it is, are there any other operating systems that are better that people should be using 
instead of Windows 10?  An analysis of the Windows Operating System should reveal what a good operating system does, if Windows fits those criteria, and if any other operating 
systems are better than windows. 

When Windows 10 was first introduced in July of 2015 it “introduced an updated start menu, new login methods, a better taskbar, a notification center, support for virtual 
desktops, the edge browser and a host of other usability updates” (lifewire.com). All this might sound impressive but does any of it really make the operating system good? When 
we look at the services that Windows 10 provides we can see that many of the functions are met. It has several API’s, one can develop and execute programs, you can access I/O 
devices with it, and accounting which is the operation recorder (docs.microsoft.com). Windows 10 does also perform several additional services that are not mentioned in the 
basic OS services. Error detection and response is lacking in windows systems though, the books specifies that “the OS must provide a response that clears the error condition 
with the least impact on running applications” (Stallings, 43). The way that Windows deals with errors is with the “blue screen of death”. This can mess with ones open 
applications because the computer to crash and stop working and the open applications do not save. This does not really seem like a good way to handle error detection and could 
cause issues with using any Windows OS.

Windows itself has its own built in security application, Windows defender antivirus. This is a free application that comes preinstalled on windows computers and has some very 
basic security features. It does provide the system with a firewall, while Windows itself provides an access control mechanism and authentication protocols. Although, and I 
personally have dealt with this problem, the recent windows update forced me and many people to set up a pin for user authentication. The qualifications for these pins are not 
as strict as the qualification for the regular password.  This is not ideal because the system forces you to create one and the system will allow people to create a very 
unsecure password. Good passwords are a cornerstone of secure user authentication and just a good policy to have. Despite that though according to av-test.org, a website that 
tests different antivirus software and compares them, windows holds up pretty well compared to other free and commercial software (av-test.org). Next, aesthetically Windows has 
a layout most people are familiar with. And since most people use windows and have used Windows systems for a very long time they should be familiar with how thing work and 
where things are. Windows 10 itself is a major improvement on the last version windows 8, which was built for touch screen and was hard at times to navigate. It should be noted 
that in all researched material on Windows the only people that actually seemed like they liked Windows 10 was Microsoft.

No matter what way you look at it Windows is a bad operating System. It is only popular because it comes preinstalled on most computers and people don’t know any better. Going 
with a Linux distro is really the way to go. Going from there the question becomes which one of thousands and mostly that really is up to preference. But honestly operating 
systems are a fascinating subject and people should really pay more attention to them.






